doc/examples/contour_demo.md, before:

title: Contour Demo
---

# Contour Demo

Source: [example/fortran/contour_demo/contour_demo.f90](../../example/fortran/contour_demo/contour_demo.f90)

This example demonstrates contour plotting capabilities, including basic contours, custom levels, and mixing contour plots with line plots.

## Files

- `contour_demo.f90` - Source code
- `contour_gaussian.png/pdf/txt` - Gaussian function contour plot
- `mixed_plot.png/pdf/txt` - Combined contour and line plot

## Running

```bash
make example ARGS="contour_demo"
```

## Features Demonstrated

- **Basic contours**: Automatic level selection
- **Custom levels**: User-defined contour levels
- **Mixed plots**: Combining contours with line plots
- **Label formatting**: Contour level labels

## Output

### Contour Gaussian

![contour_gaussian.png](../../media/examples/contour_demo/contour_gaussian.png)

<!-- ASCII preview removed to keep pages concise; full ASCII linked below. -->

> **Full ASCII Output**: [Download contour_gaussian.txt](../../media/examples/contour_demo/contour_gaussian.txt) | [ASCII Format Guide](../ascii_output_format.md)

[Download PDF](../../media/examples/contour_demo/contour_gaussian.pdf)

### Mixed Plot

![mixed_plot.png](../../media/examples/contour_demo/mixed_plot.png)

<!-- ASCII preview removed to keep pages concise; full ASCII linked below. -->

> **Full ASCII Output**: [Download mixed_plot.txt](../../media/examples/contour_demo/mixed_plot.txt) | [ASCII Format Guide](../ascii_output_format.md)

[Download PDF](../../media/examples/contour_demo/mixed_plot.pdf)

Commit message:

fix: Unify examples with overlapping / duplicate scope (fixes #1113) (#1119)
Summary
- Streamline and cross-link contour-related examples to reduce
duplication.

Scope
- Docs only:
doc/examples/{contour_demo.md,colored_contours.md,index.md}.

Verification
- Ran `make test-ci` and `make test-docs`: all passed locally (120s
timeout).
- No code or build behavior changed.

Rationale
- Consolidates near-duplicate guidance by cross-linking line vs filled
contours.
- Keeps both examples while clarifying scope to avoid user confusion.

doc/examples/contour_demo.md, after:

title: Contour Demo
---

# Contour Demo

Source: [example/fortran/contour_demo/contour_demo.f90](../../example/fortran/contour_demo/contour_demo.f90)

This example demonstrates line contour plotting (level lines) with custom levels and a mixed plot combining contours with a line overlay.

Note: For filled/colored contours (continuous shaded regions) and colormap comparisons, see also: [Colored Contours](./colored_contours.html).

## Files

- `contour_demo.f90` - Source code
- `contour_gaussian.png/pdf/txt` - Gaussian function contour plot
- `mixed_plot.png/pdf/txt` - Combined contour and line plot

## Running

```bash
make example ARGS="contour_demo"
```

## Features Demonstrated

- **Line contours**: Level lines with automatic or custom levels
- **Custom levels**: User-defined contour levels
- **Mixed plots**: Combine contours with a line profile overlay

## Output

### Contour Gaussian

![contour_gaussian.png](../../media/examples/contour_demo/contour_gaussian.png)

<!-- ASCII preview removed to keep pages concise; full ASCII linked below. -->

> **Full ASCII Output**: [Download contour_gaussian.txt](../../media/examples/contour_demo/contour_gaussian.txt) | [ASCII Format Guide](../ascii_output_format.md)

[Download PDF](../../media/examples/contour_demo/contour_gaussian.pdf)

### Mixed Plot

![mixed_plot.png](../../media/examples/contour_demo/mixed_plot.png)

<!-- ASCII preview removed to keep pages concise; full ASCII linked below. -->

> **Full ASCII Output**: [Download mixed_plot.txt](../../media/examples/contour_demo/mixed_plot.txt) | [ASCII Format Guide](../ascii_output_format.md)

[Download PDF](../../media/examples/contour_demo/mixed_plot.pdf)
