doc/testing_guide.md, before:

title: Testing Guide
---

# Testing Guide

## Test Artifacts

All automated tests persist their generated plots under `test/output/<suite>/`.
If images, PDFs, or text dumps appear in the repository root, remove them and
rerun the tests so the artifacts land in their dedicated subdirectories. The
`make clean` target also prunes stray files outside `test/output/`.

## MPEG Validation Testing

### Running MPEG Tests

```bash
# Run comprehensive validation framework tests
make test ARGS="--target test_mpeg_comprehensive_validation_framework"

# Run false positive detection tests  
make test ARGS="--target test_mpeg_false_positive_detection_comprehensive"

# Run all MPEG validation tests
find test/ -name "*mpeg*.f90" | wc -l  # Shows 21 test files
make test | grep mpeg
```

### Test Coverage

**21 Test Files** covering:
- Comprehensive validation framework
- False positive detection (Issue #32)
- Size validation with frame/resolution correlation
- Header validation for MP4 format signatures
- FFprobe external tool integration
- Edge cases and stress testing
- Performance validation
- Media player compatibility

### Test Interpretation

**Successful Output**:
```
=== COMPREHENSIVE VALIDATION FRAMEWORK TESTS ===
Layer 1 - Basic validation: T
Layer 2 - Size validation: T  
Layer 3 - Header validation: T
Layer 4 - Semantic validation: T
Layer 5 - External tool validation: T
Overall framework validation: T
```

**Failure Analysis**:
- **Layer 1 Failure**: File missing or corrupted
- **Layer 2 Failure**: File size inadequate for content
- **Layer 3 Failure**: Invalid MP4 format headers
- **Layer 5 Failure**: External tools detect format errors

## Warning Control

### Environment Variables

Control warning output during testing and development:

```bash
# Suppress all warnings (useful for CI and automated testing)
export FORTPLOT_SUPPRESS_WARNINGS=1
make test

# Force warnings even in CI environments
export FORTPLOT_FORCE_WARNINGS=1
make test

# Default behavior (warnings visible during development)
unset FORTPLOT_SUPPRESS_WARNINGS
unset FORTPLOT_FORCE_WARNINGS
make test
```

**Supported Values**:
- `FORTPLOT_SUPPRESS_WARNINGS`: `1`, `true`, `yes`, `on` (case-insensitive)
- `FORTPLOT_FORCE_WARNINGS`: `1`, `true`, `yes`, `on` (case-insensitive)

**CI Auto-Detection**: Warnings are automatically suppressed on common CI
platforms (GitHub Actions, Jenkins, Travis CI, CircleCI).

## Windows CI Performance Testing

### Optimized CI Testing
```bash
# Enable Windows CI performance optimizations
export FORTPLOT_USE_MEMORY_BACKEND=1
export FORTPLOT_MINIMIZE_IO=1
make test
```

### Performance Monitoring
```bash
# Run with performance monitoring enabled
export FORTPLOT_DEBUG=1
make test ARGS="--target test_pcolormesh_consolidated"

# Check for tests exceeding 30-second target
make test | grep "REGRESSION\|Performance target"
```

### Critical Windows CI Tests
```bash
# Previously slow tests now optimized for CI
make test ARGS="--target test_pcolormesh_consolidated"      # Was >2min, now <30sec
make test ARGS="--target test_histogram_consolidated"       # Was >1.5min, now <30sec  
make test ARGS="--target test_contour_filled_backend_rendering"  # Was >3min, now <30sec
```

See [Windows CI Performance Guide](windows_ci_performance.md) for full
optimization details.

## OO/Stateful Compatibility Checks

Run these guards after introducing or modifying plotting helpers so that OO and
stateful APIs stay aligned with `pyplot-fortran` positional expectations.

```bash
make test ARGS="--target test_pyplot_legacy_order"
make test ARGS="--target test_legacy_positional_order"
```

**Passing criteria**
- Legacy positional calls compile without keyword reordering.
- Global pyplot façade and `figure_t` helpers report matching plot counts.


## General Testing

### All Tests
```bash
make test
```

### Clean Test Output
```bash
# Run tests without warning noise
FORTPLOT_SUPPRESS_WARNINGS=1 make test
```

### Specific Test Categories
```bash
# Figure and basic plotting
make test ARGS="--target test_figure_basics"

# Animation functionality  
make test ARGS="--target test_animation_save"

# Unicode support
make test ARGS="--target test_unicode_detection"

# Warning suppression system
make test ARGS="--target test_warning_suppression_control"
```

### Marker Rendering Regression Guard
```bash
make test ARGS="--target test_marker_example_guard"
```
Run this guard to validate marker rendering artifacts across PNG/PDF/ASCII
outputs. It is the canonical CI regression check for marker output and
supersedes the retired `test_markers_rendering` smoke test.

### Test Requirements
- Modern Fortran compiler (gfortran-11+)
- Optional: FFmpeg for MPEG validation tests
- Test files automatically cleaned up after execution

Commit message:

polish: reconcile test artifact directory guidance (fixes #1442) (#1448)
## Summary
- Establishes `build/test/output/` as the canonical test artifact
directory
- Removes conflicting references to `test/output/verification/` which
never existed
- Updates documentation (CLAUDE.md, doc/testing_guide.md), .gitignore,
and helper script

## Verification

```bash
$ bash scripts/check_root_artifacts.sh
Root artifact hygiene check passed.
CMakeLists.txt present for downstream CMake integration: PASS

$ FORTPLOT_SUPPRESS_WARNINGS=1 make test-ci
CI essential test suite completed successfully
```

## Test plan
- [x] Root artifact check script passes
- [x] CI test suite passes
- [x] Documentation consistent across all files

doc/testing_guide.md, after:

title: Testing Guide
---

# Testing Guide

## Test Artifacts

Automated tests write generated plots under `build/test/output/` (Issue #820
via `src/testing/fortplot_test_helpers.f90`). This directory is ephemeral and
gitignored. If images, PDFs, or text dumps appear in the repository root,
remove them and rerun the tests so the artifacts land in the proper directory.
The `make clean` target also prunes stray files outside the expected output
trees.

## MPEG Validation Testing

### Running MPEG Tests

```bash
# Run comprehensive validation framework tests
make test ARGS="--target test_mpeg_comprehensive_validation_framework"

# Run false positive detection tests  
make test ARGS="--target test_mpeg_false_positive_detection_comprehensive"

# Run all MPEG validation tests
find test/ -name "*mpeg*.f90" | wc -l  # Shows 21 test files
make test | grep mpeg
```

### Test Coverage

**21 Test Files** covering:
- Comprehensive validation framework
- False positive detection (Issue #32)
- Size validation with frame/resolution correlation
- Header validation for MP4 format signatures
- FFprobe external tool integration
- Edge cases and stress testing
- Performance validation
- Media player compatibility

### Test Interpretation

**Successful Output**:
```
=== COMPREHENSIVE VALIDATION FRAMEWORK TESTS ===
Layer 1 - Basic validation: T
Layer 2 - Size validation: T  
Layer 3 - Header validation: T
Layer 4 - Semantic validation: T
Layer 5 - External tool validation: T
Overall framework validation: T
```

**Failure Analysis**:
- **Layer 1 Failure**: File missing or corrupted
- **Layer 2 Failure**: File size inadequate for content
- **Layer 3 Failure**: Invalid MP4 format headers
- **Layer 5 Failure**: External tools detect format errors

## Warning Control

### Environment Variables

Control warning output during testing and development:

```bash
# Suppress all warnings (useful for CI and automated testing)
export FORTPLOT_SUPPRESS_WARNINGS=1
make test

# Force warnings even in CI environments
export FORTPLOT_FORCE_WARNINGS=1
make test

# Default behavior (warnings visible during development)
unset FORTPLOT_SUPPRESS_WARNINGS
unset FORTPLOT_FORCE_WARNINGS
make test
```

**Supported Values**:
- `FORTPLOT_SUPPRESS_WARNINGS`: `1`, `true`, `yes`, `on` (case-insensitive)
- `FORTPLOT_FORCE_WARNINGS`: `1`, `true`, `yes`, `on` (case-insensitive)

**CI Auto-Detection**: Warnings are automatically suppressed on common CI
platforms (GitHub Actions, Jenkins, Travis CI, CircleCI).

## Windows CI Performance Testing

### Optimized CI Testing
```bash
# Enable Windows CI performance optimizations
export FORTPLOT_USE_MEMORY_BACKEND=1
export FORTPLOT_MINIMIZE_IO=1
make test
```

### Performance Monitoring
```bash
# Run with performance monitoring enabled
export FORTPLOT_DEBUG=1
make test ARGS="--target test_pcolormesh_consolidated"

# Check for tests exceeding 30-second target
make test | grep "REGRESSION\|Performance target"
```

### Critical Windows CI Tests
```bash
# Previously slow tests now optimized for CI
make test ARGS="--target test_pcolormesh_consolidated"      # Was >2min, now <30sec
make test ARGS="--target test_histogram_consolidated"       # Was >1.5min, now <30sec  
make test ARGS="--target test_contour_filled_backend_rendering"  # Was >3min, now <30sec
```

See [Windows CI Performance Guide](windows_ci_performance.md) for full
optimization details.

## OO/Stateful Compatibility Checks

Run these guards after introducing or modifying plotting helpers so that OO and
stateful APIs stay aligned with `pyplot-fortran` positional expectations.

```bash
make test ARGS="--target test_pyplot_legacy_order"
make test ARGS="--target test_legacy_positional_order"
```

**Passing criteria**
- Legacy positional calls compile without keyword reordering.
- Global pyplot façade and `figure_t` helpers report matching plot counts.


## General Testing

### All Tests
```bash
make test
```

### Clean Test Output
```bash
# Run tests without warning noise
FORTPLOT_SUPPRESS_WARNINGS=1 make test
```

### Specific Test Categories
```bash
# Figure and basic plotting
make test ARGS="--target test_figure_basics"

# Animation functionality  
make test ARGS="--target test_animation_save"

# Unicode support
make test ARGS="--target test_unicode_detection"

# Warning suppression system
make test ARGS="--target test_warning_suppression_control"
```

### Marker Rendering Regression Guard
```bash
make test ARGS="--target test_marker_example_guard"
```
Run this guard to validate marker rendering artifacts across PNG/PDF/ASCII
outputs. It is the canonical CI regression check for marker output and
supersedes the retired `test_markers_rendering` smoke test.

### Test Requirements
- Modern Fortran compiler (gfortran-11+)
- Optional: FFmpeg for MPEG validation tests
- Test files automatically cleaned up after execution
